The domain of work examines not only patterns of how women and men are getting into the labour market, but also how they are getting on there. It captures some of the gendered patterns that exist within the labour market: participation, segregation and quality of work. Although the domain presents a relatively high overall score of 69 on average at EU level, there remains much room for improvement before reaching full gender equality. The findings show that segregation patterns remain strong and that they are associated with quality issues such as training, health and safety at work, as well as flexible work ing arrangements, with a mixed picture across Member States. It also considers participation of women and men in the labour market, corroborating evidence that differ 140ences exist in terms of parttime work and duration of working life. Women remain less likely to participate in the labour market Despite an encouraging trend towards gender equality in employment at EU level, the gender gap in employment rates still persists. Given the fact that more women than men work on a parttime basis, gender gaps in employment may in fact be underestimated, without resorting to comparisons in full time equivalence. Full time equivalent employment rates show that gender gaps in employment are even wider. Women continue to be less likely to participate in the labour force, throughout all EU Member States, they are working fewer hours when they do so, and spend fewer years overall in work than men. These trends show that women are at higher risk of economic dependence in terms of income, responsibility and power. However, it is important to note, that developments in employment and unemployment during the last four years of recession provide evidence of a downward leveling of gender gaps through greater employment losses and higher unemployment expansions among men (European Commission, 2013). At policy level, the Gender Equality Index scores show that wide gender gaps remain in achieving the Europe 2020 target of ensuring that 75 % of the population aged 20–64 should be employed (IP/10/225). Experiences of working lives for women and men represent the heart of the EU policy agenda on gender equality. Incentives to increase women’s participation in the labour market have been increasingly supported by ensuring that gender gaps in familyrelated entitlements, such as parental or carer’s leave or measures to support greater worklife balance, are being addressed. Large gender segregation in the labour market remain prevalent Gender segregation of labour markets is another issue which exacerbates gender inequalities in terms of the gaps in earnings, impacts on career advancement, quality of work and eventually on economic independence of women and men. The scores show the level of gender  inequality in terms of segregation, with women persistently representing a strong majority of those working in typically feminised sectors such as education, health ser vices and social work. The gendered nature of quality of work needs to be measured The EU policy focuses not only on providing more jobs, but also on ensuring the provision of better jobs as part of the Europe 2020 Strategy. The Gender Equality Index includes indicators of quality of work, measuring flexibility of working time, health and safety at work and training at work, which show persisting gender inequalities which vary widely across Member States. Due to stringent statistical criteria, several other indicators of quality of work (e.g., worklife balance) were excluded from analysis. Never theless, the findings of the Index provide a qualitative contribution to the broader analysis of worklife balance provisions, such as flexible work arrangements, childcare, elderly care or parental leave provisions, which comprise a major focus area of the EU policy agenda and European Semester recommendations. Given that worklife balance is a highly gendered issue, the interpretation of the scores of the Gender Equality Index in relation to worklife balance provisions represents important avenues of further analyses. 