When analyzing the various gender dimensions related to human development, the
data presented in the Regional Gender Profile on poverty and its disproportionate
impact on women reveal some trends. In particular, gender inequalities persist in
the labor market, where women face a disproportionate burden of unpaid work that
limits their economic autonomy and participation on equal terms with their male
peers. As a result, women in the region face horizontal segregation, characterized by
informality and low-productivity sectors associated with lower levels of education,
low wages, low social security coverage and greater job insecurity.
On the other hand, those women who manage to break through in their jobs find it
difficult to occupy decision-making positions, impacting on their careers and working
conditions, including the existence of recurrent wage gaps. Intersectionality exacerbates
the perverse effects of occupational and social exclusion. These inequalities contribute
to keeping women in situations of poverty, even when they are employed, pointing to
the need for inclusive public policies that comprehensively address gender dimensions
in order to achieve substantive equality and sustainable and equitable development.
In the same line of analysis, the Profile provides regional data on violence against
women and examines how it negatively impacts on women’s health and autonomy,
exacerbating the relationship with poverty and women’s well-being. This phenomenon
takes many forms, including physical, emotional, sexual and economic, limiting
women’s ability to make decisions and participate in education and work. Child, early and forced marriages and unions have hardly diminished, disproportionately affecting
girls and adolescent girls living in poverty, perpetuating cycles of vulnerability.
Furthermore, despite progress in education for women, gender gaps persist in the
acquisition of digital skills and participation in sectors such as science and technology.
Disparities in the quality of housing and basic services also impact on the health and
well-being of women, who are often relegated to domestic roles and face greater
hardship in precarious environments.
Linked to the above, the Profile warns that social protection in LAC faces significant
challenges due to gaps in coverage, insufficient benefits and sustainability risks. The
persistence of labor informality limits the development of universal contributory
systems, while tax policies may hinder the generation of resources for non-contributory
programmes. In addition, the demographic transition and aging population put pressure
on pension systems, highlighting the urgent need for comprehensive care policies.
Women face additional obstacles in accessing contributory social protection because
of their increased share of unpaid work, which is reflected in lower levels of old-age
coverage and benefits compared to men, and greater vulnerability to poverty and food
insecurity. Strategies such as extending social protection to women in the informal
sector, closing wage gaps and recognizing care work are crucial to developing universal
and equitable social protection systems. In addition, sectors such as paid domestic
work have high levels of informality and low social security coverage, requiring reforms
to adapt to the characteristics of this type of employment in order to guarantee
effective access to social protection.
In relation to unpaid work, evidence indicates that care influences women’s
educational and employment decisions, being one of the central elements limiting
women’s participation in the labor market and contributing to the persistence of
gender inequality. In addition, the lack of public care services deepens exclusion
and poverty, especially for women in low-income households, the so-called “sticky
floors”, contributing to the persistence of gender inequality. In macroeconomic terms,
care work contributes significantly to GDP, but paid care workers, mostly women
and migrants, face high levels of informality and job insecurity, particularly in the
domestic work sector.
The care crisis is worsening with the aging population and socio-economic changes,
highlighting the need to invest in comprehensive care systems to promote gender
equality, social well-being and economic growth. This implies recognizing, redistributing
and reducing unpaid care work, rewarding decent jobs and ensuring the representation
of paid care workers, as well as promoting co-responsibility between the state, the
private sector, the community and families. In LAC, several countries are making
progress in implementing comprehensive care systems, recognizing care as a
fundamental human right and committing to policies that promote gender equality
and social well-being. However, in order to make adequate progress, it is crucial to find
sustainable financing pathways that ensure universality, equity and intergenerational
solidarity in the provision of care services.
Against this backdrop, the Profile points to the global economic dynamics of the years
2022 and 2023, which reflected uneven growth between emerging and developed
economies, with a slight slowdown in LAC. The economic context in the region
continues to be marked by high inflation rates and limited growth in international
trade, so it is expected that the macroeconomic space to be configured for the region
will be characterized by low economic growth rates.
On the other hand, despite some progress, gender gaps in employment are persistent
and remain very high. Despite the recovery of employment and unemployment rates
in 2023, women continue to face less productive jobs and less favorable conditions,
influenced by the persistent burden of unpaid care work. Similarly, although all
countries in the region recovered the total volume of hours worked before the
pandemic, there are also signs of a slowdown and even a fall by the end of 2023,
particularly in the domestic service sector, that employs 1 in 9 women in the region’s
labor force. As a result, the gender gap in labor income remains significant, affecting
mainly low-income women and aggravated by the penalization of maternity and the
lack of work-life balance policies. This context points to the urgent need to address
these structural inequalities in order to move towards decent work and more inclusive
economic growth in the region.